GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: We bring you the
"NewsHour" tonight
from the Quicken Loans Arena in
Cleveland,
Ohio, site of the 2016
Republican National
Convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's day three of
the convention.
Donald Trump and Mike Pence
emerge as a united
front, but is the GOP ready to
rally behind
the new Republican ticket?
GWEN IFILL: And from "The
Apprentice" to the
Republican nominee, we wrap up
our series
mapping Trump's path from
Queens, New York,
to, he hopes, the White House.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN, Author,
"TrumpNation": Donald
Trump, the political operator,
is very much
the same person as Donald Trump,
the marketer
and self-promoter.
HARI SREENIVASAN: I'm Hari
Sreenivasan in
Washington.
Our End of AIDS series takes us
to a Kenyan
island where reducing the spread
of HIV means
reaching one group in
particular.
JON COHEN, "Science": The HIV
prevalence in
fishermen is incredibly high. I
mean, we're
talking on the order of 30, 40
percent. That's
something you see in people who
inject drugs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The nominating is
done, and
Donald Trump is back here in
Cleveland, the
Republican convention city.
Tonight, delegates hear from the
man who he
chose to be his running mate,
and from a rival
who battled him nearly to the
end.
Correspondent Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
LISA DESJARDINS: Donald Trump
flew into Cleveland
this afternoon to claim what he
won last night,
then, a helicopter ride to
downtown, where
he was joined by his running
mate, Indiana
Governor Mike Pence.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
The last time, I got accused for
speaking
a little too long, so this time,
I'm going
to speak a lot short. But I just
want to introduce
a man who's become a friend of
mine, somebody
who's going to make an
unbelievable vice president
of the United States, Governor
Mike Pence.
GOV. MIKE PENCE (R-IN), Vice
Presidential
Candidate: It is such an honor
to welcome
you to Cleveland. We're excited
to hear you
address the nation tomorrow
night. It's been
exciting to hear from your
family. More to
come tonight. And I'm convinced
what begins
in Cleveland will end in the
White House.
LISA DESJARDINS: The ticket's
number-two man
delivers his own prime-time
address tonight,
and campaign manager Paul
Manafort says the
nation will see what Trump saw.
PAUL MANAFORT, Trump Convention
Manager: Governor
Pence was the kind of guy who
didn't see no
for an answer, that, when he
became governor,
and he made a difference as
governor. And
that was an attitude was very
appealing, and
record was very appealing.
LISA DESJARDINS: Manafort also
brushed off
questions today of any perceived
awkwardness
between the two men-
PAUL MANAFORT: Have they spent
two years together?
No. But are they comfortable
with each other
both on a personal basis and a
policy basis?
Absolutely. Will that grow? Yes.
LISA DESJARDINS: Pence will use
his speech
to focus on tonight's theme,
make America
first again. Also scheduled to
speak, a slew
of Trump's primary challengers,
including
Texas Senator Ted Cruz. He's
stopped short
of making a formal endorsement,
after a bitter
primary battle, during which
Trump dubbed
him lyin' Ted.
Even today, Trump's plane
interrupted Cruz
at one point, as he spoke to
supporters.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R), Texas: That
was pretty
well-orchestrated.
You know, there's a lot of talk
about unity.
I want to see unity, and the way
to see unity
is for us to unite behind shared
principles,
us to unite in defense of
liberty.
LISA DESJARDINS: Cruz gave no
specifics on
exactly what he will say
tonight, but Trump's
lieutenant, Manafort, promised a
supportive
speech.
PAUL MANAFORT: I think that he
will talk about
Hillary Clinton and the failures
-- how America
cannot afford to have Hillary
Clinton president.
And I think he will say
something, he will
give a sign of where he is on
Donald Trump
that will be pleasing to the
Trump campaign
and to Republicans.
LISA DESJARDINS: Also tonight,
speaking the
that podium will be another
member of the
Trump family. Eric Trump is the
candidate's
middle son. He's expected to
give a very personal
portrait of a son speaking of
his father.
Meanwhile, the fallout continues
from Melania
Trump's speech Monday night that
lifted sections
from a Michelle Obama speech.
Yesterday, the
Trump campaign dismissed any
allegations of
plagiarism. Today, Meredith
McIver, a Trump
staff writer, took
responsibility.
In a statement, McIver wrote:
"She read me
some passages from Mrs. Obama's
speech as
examples. I wrote them down and
later included
some of the phrasing in the
draft that ultimately
became the final speech. I
didn't check Mrs.
Obama's speech."
McIver said she offered Trump
her resignation,
but he refused.
Outside the convention hall,
there were new
protests, and this time,
multiple arrests.
Police on horseback and bicycles
converged
on one site and used pepper
spray as anti-Trump
protesters tried to burn an
American flag.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins
in Cleveland.
GWEN IFILL: And now we go down
to the convention
floor.
NPR's "Weekend Edition Sunday"
host Rachel
Martin will be with us this week
and next
for our joint "PBS NewsHour"-NPR
coverage
of the conventions.
Rachel, what are you watching
for tonight?
RACHEL MARTIN: Hi there, Gwen.
So, yes, I'm down on the
convention floor
near the area where the
delegation from Texas
is sitting, because, as you
heard, Senator
Ted Cruz will be speaking
tonight, addressing
the delegates here. He ended up
being the
most fierce competitor against
Donald Trump
in that primary season.
Even though he secured a
prime-time speaking
slot in the convention tonight,
he hasn't
actually endorsed Donald Trump.
So it is going
to be interesting to watch
whether or not
he uses this as an opportunity
to do just
that, or if he decides just to
move past the
moment and instead lay out his
own vision
for the future of the Republican
Party, with
perhaps an eye on 2020, when he
may have another
shot at the nomination himself.
But no doubt the big draw
tonight is Mike
Pence. When the vice
presidential nominee
takes the stage, he will be
commanding all
the attention. Pence was picked
for the Trump
ticket for that V.P. slot as an
olive branch
to establishment Republicans who
have been
reluctant to support Trump.
But it is really going to be
interesting to
watch whether or not Pence is
able to unify
the party in that kind of
address tonight,
because, no doubt, there is a
real split in
the party right now between
establishment
conservatives on the one hand
and Trump supporters
who say, listen, the party has
missed the
boat. They don't understand
where the voters
are anymore.
They're looking to Donald Trump
to kind of
steer the ship, steer the
Republican Party
in a new direction. So, we are
going to be
exploring that tension tonight
and asking
a question. What does it mean to
be a Republican
in 2016?
So, lots to come here. Stay with
us. I will
throw it back to you, Gwen and
Judy, in the
studio.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you,
Rachel. And we will
be talking to you throughout the
night.
It was before a crowd of more
than 1,000 delegates
at the Republican state
convention in Springfield,
Illinois in 1858 where Abraham
Lincoln said
a house divided against itself
cannot stand.
This week in Cleveland, we have
seen real
divisions in the party of
Lincoln, and heard
questions raised about how they
unite, as
you just heard from Rachel.
We explore those now with John
Feehery. He's
a Republican strategist and
columnist for
The Hill newspaper. He worked
for many years
on Capitol Hill for members of
the House Republican
leadership. And Leslie Rutledge,
she's Arkansas'
attorney general. She's also a
speaker you
saw on stage here last night.
And we welcome both of you to
the program.
LESLIE RUTLEDGE, Arkansas
Attorney General:
Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Leslie Rutledge,
let me start
with you.
Is the Republican Party that we
have seen
at this convention both in the
speakers and
in the messages we have been
hearing, is that
a united party?
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: It is a very
united party.
And I think that what we have
seen this week,
as the delegates work through
the platform,
as they work through the rules
and all the
issues, and what it boils down
to is that
the Republicans are ready to
take back the
White House. We're ready to grow
jobs across
America, to push back on the
regulatory environment
that hurts small businesses.
And that's why we are seeing
Republicans this
week uniting behind Donald Trump
and Governor
Pence.
GWEN IFILL: John Feehery, we
have -- you have
been to many conventions. You
have worked
on Capitol Hill for some time.
Or you did
from some time.
Now we see a convention that
feels very different
from the convention that
nominated Mitt Romney
and Paul Ryan, someone very
different from
when they nominated John McCain
and Sarah
Palin. What would you say is the
difference?
JOHN FEEHERY, Republican
Strategist: Well,
I think it's a completely
different dynamic,
because we have a non-politician
who is really
kind of dominating this whole --
I think the
most effective speakers,
including you, were
people who are not in the
Washington mind-set,
some people who were kind of --
a lot of normal
Americans kind of expressing
themselves.
I think that Trump has kind of
brought that
to the table. Many times, we
have been this
establishment party. We are not
the party
of George Bush anymore. We have
moved on.
In many ways, we're a more
populist party.
We're a party that is very
frustrated with
how Washington has operated to a
really nth
degree.
And I'm not sure if we're a
divided party
,but there are a lot of sore
losers out there
and a lot of people who are not
comfortable
with Donald Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, what about
that, Leslie
Rutledge? What is going to
happen to those
delegates? As you know, he got
the lion's
share of the delegate votes.
He's the nominee
of the party, but there were,
what, 700 and
some votes for somebody else.
How does that
element of the party come
together?
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Sure.
Well, Donald Trump has already
united the
party. While there may have been
votes for
someone else on the floor, but
across America
in those primaries, new voters
were coming
out in droves just to vote for
Donald Trump.
And that's what we were seeing,
this enthusiasm
behind the outside-Washington
candidate in
Mr. Trump, in Governor Pence,
because they
know that things must change and
that Hillary
Clinton is dangerous.
She's -- deception and
dishonesty are second
nature to Hillary Clinton. And
that's what
I talked about last night in my
speech. And
that's why, when we look at the
Supreme Court,
people ask me, why is this
election so important,
Leslie? And I tell them, as
attorney general,
as the chief legal officer, we
look to the
Supreme Court nominations. And
for me, it
boils down to those two words.
GWEN IFILL: You just mentioned
that you did
spend a lot of time on the floor
last night
talking about Hillary Clinton.
That seemed
to be the theme of the night, as
much as jobs
and the economy.
So, is this an anti-Clinton
convention or
a pro-Trump convention?
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Well, it's
both.
And certainly it's prominently
pro-Donald
Trump, because we want Donald
Trump to be
president. We are supporting him
100 percent.
But what we don't want are four
more years
of the same failed policies that
hurt Arkansas
and businesses around the
country.
When we look at these small
businesses, which
are the backbone of America, we
want to get
these regulatory burdens off of
the small
businesses. I'm raised on a
cattle farm, married
to a row crop farmer. We know
firsthand the
sort of regulatory burdens on
our farmers
and on industry across America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Feehery, who
else does
Donald Trump need to reach out
to, to win
this election?
We both are familiar with the
so-called autopsy,
with the report done by the
Republican Party
after Mitt Romney's loss in
2012. In essence,
it said the party needs to reach
beyond its
base to Hispanics, to
minorities. What does
Donald Trump need to do?
JOHN FEEHERY: Well, I think
there are two
groups that are really worrying
for him, and
that is female voters, because
he's getting
crunched by female voters.
I'm glad that you're here
talking, because
you need to make that case. He
has got to
change his messaging, because I
think, for
a lot of the people, a lot of
women voters,
he has is not being particularly
kind of sensitive
in his language.
The second group, I think he's
got to expand
the working class. He's really
gotten effective
with white working-class voters.
But there's
plenty of African-American
working-class voters,
many Hispanic working-class
voters that are
really frustrated about this
economy, haven't
really had much going on in the
last couple
of years.
And I think if he can spread
that message
about he can bring a more
pro-business philosophy
and grow jobs more effectively,
I think that
was kind of a wasted opportunity
yesterday.
Yes, we need to bash Hillary
Clinton, but
I'll tell you what -- because
that unites
the party. But we also have to
have a positive
message about how Trump can help
grow this
economy, because ultimately
people want that.
GWEN IFILL: Well, let's ask
Leslie Rutledge
to respond to that.
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Sure.
GWEN IFILL: Just so happens
you're a woman.
Just so happens you're a very
big Donald Trump
supporter. How does the party --
or does the
party need to do what John
Feehery is suggesting?
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Well, as I
mentioned last
night in my remarks, that Donald
Trump understands
that women, as well as men, are
not single-issue
voters.
And for far too long, the
Democratic Party
and certainly Secretary Clinton
have treated
women as if we were single-issue
voters. Women
an men care about jobs. They
care about economy.
They care about national
security.
GWEN IFILL: But I didn't hear
that conversation
on the floor last night.
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Well, if you
listened to
my speech, you heard me say that
exact line,
that Donald Trump -- unlike
Hillary Clinton,
Donald Trump knows that women
and men are
not single-issue voters.
We care about the jobs, the
economy and national
security, verbatim, and that's
what I said
last night. And we're going to
keep talking
about that, because women and
men, that's
what they want. They want a safe
place for
their families to live. They
want to be able
to have a job, to be able to pay
their bills,
go to those soccer games. And
that's the sort
of America that people across
this country
want.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John Feehery, you
were just
saying that some of Donald
Trump's remarks
haven't been sensitive was the
word you used.
What kind of language do you
want to see him
using that he hasn't been? What
do you want
him to stop saying? What do you
want him to
start saying?
JOHN FEEHERY: Well, listen, I
think that when
you're talking about fixing the
immigration
system, and I think Donald Trump
needs to
let the private Donald Trump
come out.
From everything I know about
from what I have
heard about Donald Trump,
privately, he's
a guy who does a lot of
listening. He is a
guy who is not full of the
bravado. He is
a guy who actually is very
effective in small
groups. Everyone I have talked
to says that.
He needs to let the private guy
out, because
I think the bravado and kind of
the language
that gets beyond the pale a
little bit -- and
we all know what it is -- he
needs to scale
that back. And I think if he can
-- just continue
to pound on Hillary Clinton is
not sufficient.
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: Has this convention
-- I want
you both to take a stab at this
-- has it
helped Donald Trump?
There have been distractions. We
saw the Melania
Trump speech distraction. We
have seen the
rules distraction, the Cruz
voters rising
up, booing the Trump plane today
as it landed.
I wonder whether you think this
convention
has been distracting overall or
whether it
in the end helps introduce
Donald Trump to
a broader audience?
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Absolutely.
When we talk about Melania
Trump's amazing
speech, I mean, by and large, it
was a terrific
speech filled with wonderful
messages about
Donald Trump as a husband,
Donald Trump as
a father and a grandfather and
really introducing
us, but for that distraction
that was unfortunate,
because she showed that she is a
strong, smart,
confident woman and would be a
tremendous
first lady.
Likewise, we heard from Donald
Trump Jr. last
night. We are going to hear from
more of the
Trump family to get to John's
point to see
Donald Trump the man. And four
years ago,
we didn't see enough of who Mitt
Romney was.
They didn't really showcase that
enough. And
I'm hoping that we have learned
from our mistakes
and that we are showcasing what
an incredible
person Donald Trump and the
entire Trump family
are.
JOHN FEEHERY: Listen, we have
had some hiccups
at this convention.
One of the best things that
happened is finally
the never Trump people have
ended their fantasy
land. We have the candidate. Now
we can start
looking forward. I'm looking
forward to a
good speech by Mike Pence and
Marco Rubio
and Ted Cruz tonight.
And I'm looking forward to see
what Donald
Trump says tomorrow night. And
hopefully we
have a little bit more of a
glimpse of who
he is as a real person in
private. He has
a great family. They're very,
very poised.
Let's talk about that and let's
talk about
what he can do for the rest of
our families.
GWEN IFILL: John Feehery, Leslie
Rutledge
weigh in on the future of the
Republican Party.
Thank you both very much.
LESLIE RUTLEDGE: Thank you all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you. Thank
you.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight, we continue
our series
exploring Donald Trump's life,
his transformation
from businessman to reality TV
star, to presidential
nominee.
In this final installment, we
look at Trump's
political transformation to
billionaire populist.
In retrospect, this scene seemed
inevitable,
Donald Trump, surrounded by the
trappings
of wealth and celebrity, staking
his claim
to the world's most powerful
office.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I am officially running for
president of the
United States, and we are going
to make our
country great again.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: His candidacy was
initially dismissed
as a prank, a long shot. But, in
fact, it
was 28 years in the making.
Gwenda Blair is a Trump
biographer.
GWENDA BLAIR, Author, "The
Trumps": It's not
the first time, second, third,
fourth, or
even fifth. It's the sixth time
that he has
talked about being president.
GWEN IFILL: Trump's earliest
interest in the
intersection of politics and
business was
fueled by his developer father,
Fred, but
also by a shadier figure, Roy
Cohn, the tough-talking
power attorney who rose to
prominence as Senator
Joseph McCarthy's fixer during
the communist
scares of the 1950s.
Author Timothy O'Brien:
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN, Author,
"TrumpNation": The
Donald Trump who will sue
anyone's pants off
at a drop of a hat learned that
from Roy Cohn.
The Donald who learned that the
best way for
a business campaign, or a
political campaign,
to be run was in a
scorched-earth fashion,
he learned that from Roy Cohn.
GWEN IFILL: Running for
president, or at least
talking about the possibility,
became something
of a hobby for Trump.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN: Donald Trump,
the political
operator, is very much the same
person as
Donald Trump, the marketer and
self-promoter.
And he's brought those same
self-promotional
and marketing skills to bear on
the political
race.
GWEN IFILL: Indeed, his first
foray into presidential
politics was a sales pitch,
literally, to
promote his new book.
Here's writer Michael D'Antonio.
MICHAEL D'ANTONIO, Trump
Biographer: In 1987,
he had a book, "The Art of the
Deal," that
he wanted to promote. Instead of
buying ad
space, he pretended to run for
president.
He went to New Hampshire, gave a
couple of
speeches. He made some
pronouncements about
the Reagan administration's
failures, and
got a lot of attention. He was
one of the
first people actually to use
running for president
as a business tactic.
GWEN IFILL: Trump played coy
about his political
ambitions, and even about his
political leanings.
LARRY KING, CNN: Are you a
Republican, Donald?
DONALD TRUMP: I'm a Republican,
yes.
LARRY KING: So, if there were
politics, it
would be as a Republican?
DONALD TRUMP: It would be, I
guess, as a Republican.
But I don't see that there will
be politics.
GWEN IFILL: He flirted with a
Reform Party
bid in 2000, floating Oprah
Winfrey as a possible
V.P. pick.
DONALD TRUMP: Oprah. I love
Oprah. Oprah would
always be my first choice.
LARRY KING: Oprah?
DONALD TRUMP: Oprah. Your
competitor, right?
GWEN IFILL: And he made noise
again in 2004.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, you would be
shocked if
I said that, in many cases, I
probably identify
more as a Democrat.
GWEN IFILL: The hints came again
in 2008 and
2012.
TIMOTHY O'BRIEN: He's found
these different
flash points that he's used to
get himself
attention, but he's never, ever
developed
a mature, deeply informed
political platform.
GWEN IFILL: During that time,
critics charge,
some of his positions have been
as inconsistent
as his party affiliation, on
issues like abortion.
DONALD TRUMP: Well, look, I'm
very pro-choice.
And I am very, very proud to say
that I am
pro-life.
GWEN IFILL: His view has also
clearly shifted
on the woman who is now his
likely general
election opponent.
DONALD TRUMP: Hillary Clinton, I
think is
a terrific woman. I mean, I'm a
little biased,
because I have known her for
years.
Most people know she's a
world-class liar.
GWEN IFILL: By 2011, he was
questioning President
Barack Obama's citizenship,
promoting the
already discredited notion that
the president
wasn't qualified to serve.
DONALD TRUMP: People have birth
certificates.
He doesn't have a birth
certificate. Now,
he may have one, but there's
something on
that. There's maybe religion.
Maybe it says
he is a Muslim. I don't know.
GWENDA BLAIR: It really was, I
think, seeing
whether the latent hostility
toward a black
president, how deep it was. And
he immediately
got a very, very strong feedback
that it was
quite deep, quite widespread. He
got a lot
of attention for that. And I
think that that
was really the launching for
2012. But it
turned into 2016.
GWEN IFILL: Which brings us back
to this moment:
DONALD TRUMP: I will build a
great, great
wall on our southern border. And
I will have
Mexico pay for that wall.
GWENDA BLAIR: He's a sharp guy.
He's very
shrewd at reading what people
want to hear.
And they want to hear that
they're right,
that they have a reason to be
angry.
GWEN IFILL: Blasting through a
field of 16
other primary contenders, Donald
Trump has
now emerged as the GOP nominee.
MICHAEL D'ANTONIO: Lo and
behold, by the time
he is campaigning, it is almost
enough to
run as a celebrity candidate. So
I think what
we have seen is sort of the
confluence of
the Donald Trump celebrity
strategy, the Donald
Trump self-promotion strategy,
and a changing
political environment that
allowed him to
leverage both of these things to
become the
presumptive nominee.
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you all.
Thank you very
much.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
DONALD TRUMP: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And with that
report, we turn
to syndicated columnist Mark
Shields, New
York Times columnist David
Brooks, and Amy
Walter of The Cook Political
Report, who are
also joining us around this
table each night
for our live convention
coverage.
Welcome to all three of you. We
love spending
all this time with you.
Mark, is the Donald Trump we're
seeing in
this reports that Gwen prepared,
is that the
Trump coming through at this
convention?
MARK SHIELDS: Unfortunately,
yes.
It was a terrific piece of
reporting, but
I think it is coming through,
Donald Trump's
ego, Donald Trump's vanity. It's
-- I don't
think it's necessarily
flattering to him,
but I think it is coming
through.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David?
DAVID BROOKS: I don't think so.
I think there
is a patina of normalcy in this
convention.
Like, we sit in the booth like
we always do
every four years. We get french
fries or whatever
-- I get at least every four
years.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: And so it seems
like, oh, we're
at another convention.
But this is not another
convention. This is
a party that used to believe in
free trade,
immigration, capitalism,
compassionate conservatism,
and that party is gone, at least
on the podium.
And the Republican Party is
nominating a guy
without any known principles,
without any
known experience, without any
known ethical
standards.
It's bizarre. I mean, I'm
getting more cosmically
depressed the more I think -- I
step back
from the normal patina of life
here and think
about what's actually happening.
GWEN IFILL: And as Amy wrote in
her column
for The Cook Political Report
today, the same
cheesy music from the band.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: It
is the same cheesy music.
GWEN IFILL: That's my -- that's
Amy opinion,
not mine.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: They're going to
be insulted
by this.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: How different is
this convention
from -- I mean, four years ago,
we were all
here, and there was Mitt Romney
and Paul Ryan,
four years before that, John
McCain and Sarah
Palin. And this in some ways is
exactly the
same as we have always seen, and
in some ways
it's so different.
AMY WALTER: And yet they feel
very different.
GWEN IFILL: The party is so
different.
AMY WALTER: The party is so
different, in
part because I don't think there
is a party.
This is Trump's convention, and
he has put
his stamp all over it, and we
are going to
once again see him tonight and
of course his
big speech on Thursday. But this
party is
not Trump's. And you could feel
that in the
hall. We talked a lot about the
disunity among
many members of the delegation,
the fact that
the hall is not filled, the fact
that speaker
after speaker has come up and
given their
version of what they see as the
Republican
Party.
It's not necessarily the version
that Donald
Trump has. To have Paul Ryan,
the speaker
of the House, not mention any --
the most
important parts of the Donald
Trump messaging,
the wall, immigration, trade, I
think, was
quite important and quite
significant.
I will be very curious to see
what Senator
Ted Cruz says tonight. He is
somebody who
has yet endorse Donald Trump.
And there is
no indication that he is going
to do that
tonight. Instead, he's going to
put out his
vision of the Republican Party.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet, Mark, a
lot of these
delegates really like Donald
Trump and think
he's just what their party
needs, what the
country needs.
MARK SHIELDS: They do. I don't
think there
is any question. A very healthy
majority of
them do.
I just have one point that I
want to make
about this election, this
campaign, this convention.
And it reminds me -- just before
the collapse
of the Soviet Union and the end
of the civil
war -- the end of the Cold War,
Georgy Arbatov
was a Soviet expert on the
United States.
And he made a brilliant
prediction. He said
to the United States, we're
going to do a
terrible thing to you. We're
going to deprive
you of an enemy. And the
organizing principle
of the United States defensive
foreign policy
had been opposition to the
Soviet Union. There
is no more Soviet Union.
If you take Hillary Clinton out,
there is
no organizing principle for this
convention.
Last night, Mitch McConnell
spoke, Republican
leader of the Senate; 24 times,
he mentioned
Hillary Clinton. Five times, he
mentioned
Donald Trump. Twice as often,
Hillary Clinton
has been mentioned as has Donald
Trump.
And I think it's true in this
campaign. If
Hillary Clinton disappeared
tomorrow and Donald
Trump was a referendum up or
down, he would
be in trouble. And I think the
same thing
is true for the Democrats.
GWEN IFILL: So, Mike Pence steps
up to the
podium tonight. This is his big
moment, even
though a lot of people feel they
know him.
Does that make a difference?
Does that begin
to orient this party or orient
this convention,
David Brooks, or is it just
going to be what
it's going to be?
DAVID BROOKS: I doubt it will
make a difference.
The Trump persona is sort of
dominating this
atmosphere.
But at least we might get an
emotional break.
I'm sort of struck about the
emotional tone
of the convention, which the
first night was
about loss. The second night,
let's face it,
it was sort of about hatred.
It's hard to
say you want to lock up Hillary
Clinton without
actually hating her. And it's
hard to imagine
a party that is not corrupted by
hatred.
And, also, it's funny you
mention Arbatov.
We -- they took away the Soviet
Union as an
enemy. We have got an ally
apparently in Vladimir
Putin, who we have now adjusted
the platform
to soften the Republican Party's
view of Vladimir
Putin, so we have got sort of a
soft-core
Putinism going on here.
But Pence is a nice guy, a warm
guy, a genial
guy. And that's not exactly the
tone we have
been hearing. So, I'm hoping...
GWEN IFILL: Do you think he will
talk about
the wall?
DAVID BROOKS: I would be -- I
will jump out
of the...
(CROSSTALK)
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: No. Don't do that.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID BROOKS: He will not talk
about the -- I
would be very surprised.
AMY WALTER: What I'm really
surprised that
we haven't heard about -- and
Donald Trump
is the one that I expect to make
this message
the most strongly -- is that all
this establishment
-- we have been talking about
disunity, disunity
this whole time, but Donald
Trump won this
nomination.
And Donald Trump is getting
anywhere from
40 to 45 percent of the vote
right now. He
is close to Hillary Clinton,
either tied or
a couple of points behind. And
his message
is resonating with a good group,
a good, significant
chunk of voters.
That's the message that's coming
across here
that's not coming across from
the establishment,
this idea that they have been
left behind,
that the establishment still
isn't putting
policies forward that address
economic stagnation,
the feeling they have of this
loss.
And until that happens, which I
think needs
to happen tonight, then you
know, we're going
to get that change.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark, do you
agree? That's
what -- what do they need to do
tonight and
tomorrow night to fix or to fill
out what
the message has been so far?
MARK SHIELDS: To be the party of
open arms,
rather than clenched fists.
And I think Mike Pence is a step
in the right
direction that way. It's
interesting. Paul
Ryan, Mitch McConnell, others
have used him
as a hook for sort of speaking
positively
about the Trump candidacy. Mike
Pence gives
a legitimacy...
GWEN IFILL: Wasn't that the plan
for Trump
all along?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, I don't
know.
Mike Pence is still in small
print on the
sign. And he had barely a
walk-on cameo apart
in his own announcement last
Saturday. So,
tonight, this is really the
first chance to
see and see what his role might
be in this
campaign.
GWEN IFILL: I saw Donald Trump
Jr. today at
an event in which he basically
said that Mike
Pence was a calming influence,
and they couldn't
pick any of the other finalists
because you
didn't need two Donald Trumps
being another
Donald Trump.
MARK SHIELDS: That's right.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: So they seem to
recognize on some
point the need for a calming
influence, David.
DAVID BROOKS: And someone who
seems a little
genial and will reassure
orthodox conservatives.
There really are, I think -- OK,
I'm quoting
Amy's newsletter today. But
there are several
-- I'm struck by how many
different parties
there are here. There is a
Kasich party. There
is a Cruz party. There is sort
of a Trump
thing.
And then there is an -- even an
old-guard
George H.W. Bush-Bob Dole party
lurking here
in the corners.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: And so Pence is
not offensive
to any of those parts of the
parties, whereas
Trump is alien.
GWEN IFILL: I have to say it's
good to hear
that you are reading each
other's...
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
GWEN IFILL: ... and quoting each
other, and
not just...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But they always
do, don't they?
GWEN IFILL: They do.
Thank you all very much, Amy
Walter, ark Shields,
David Brooks. We're going to see
you all later
tonight.
And you can stay with us as well
tonight,
beginning at 8:00 p.m. Eastern
time, for our
special NPR/"PBS NewsHour"
coverage of the
Republican presidential
convention in Cleveland.
Now we will go back to Hari
Sreenivasan in
D.C.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the other
news of this
day: A federal appeals court
struck down the
Texas voter I.D. law. The judges
found it
has a -- quote --
"discriminatory effect,"
and they ordered changes before
the November
election. The 2011 law requires
voters to
show one of seven forms of
identification.
Supporters say it prevents
fraud. The U.S.
Justice Department and other
opponents say
low-income and minority voters
have a harder
time obtaining the I.D.s.
The government of Turkey
declared an emergency
for the next three months, in
the wake of
last week's failed coup.
Officials also closed
more than 600 private schools
and other establishments,
as a political crackdown kept
growing. In
Istanbul, buses brought hundreds
of people
to court on suspicion of
involvement in the
coup attempt. Thousands have
been fired or
arrested.
French lawmakers have voted to
extend emergency
rule there for another six
months. The state
of emergency was first declared
after the
Paris attacks last November. It
was about
to expire, when a truck attack
in Nice killed
84 people last week. Today,
President Francois
Hollande visited a military
reserve unit that's
to be deployed under emergency
rule. He acknowledged
public criticism of security
failures.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, French
President (through
translator): After such a
tragedy, the anger
is legitimate, because
compatriots were killed,
because innocents were hit, but
it must not
degenerate into hate and
suspicion. The debate
itself is also necessary to know
the truth
when such a tragedy happens, but
it must not
affect our vital unity, nor ruin
our necessary
cohesion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Islamic
State group
has claimed the attacks. But
Hollande's government
also warned today against
blaming all Muslims.
In Syria, a U.S.-backed rebel
group says it's
investigating the beheading of a
young boy
by one of its fighters. It was
captured on
video, and opposition activists
said the victim
was a 12-year-old Palestinian
refugee. Armed
men on the video accused him of
spying for
a Palestinian militia that
supports the Syrian
government.
Back in this country, Wall
Street kept moving
higher. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained
36 points to close at 18595. The
Nasdaq rose
53 points, and the S&P 500 added
nine.
Two deaths of note tonight:
Hawaii Congressman
Mark Takai has died. The
first-term Democrat
passed away today at his home,
nine months
after he was diagnosed with
pancreatic cancer.
He announced in May he wouldn't
run again.
And Garry Marshall died Tuesday,
after a career
that created fixtures of
American entertainment.
Jeffrey Brown looks back at his
life and work.
JEFFREY BROWN: Director,
producer, writer
and actor, Garry Marshall made
TV and movie
audiences laugh for more than 50
years. and
he was still working this past
spring, promoting
his final movie, "Mother's Day."
GARRY MARSHALL, Director: I like
to really
examine the human condition of
regular people,
because I'm a regular person.
You know me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marshall grew up
in the Bronx
and began his career writing
jokes for comedians
and scripts for 1960s TV
comedies, including
"Make Room for Daddy" and "The
Dick Van Dyke
Show."
A breakthrough came in 1970,
when he co-created
TV's version of "The Odd
Couple." It ran five
years and led to a sitcom
empire. "Happy Days"
debuted in 1974, and had a
decade-long run.
In turn, it spun off "Laverne &
Shirley,"
starring Marshall's sister,
Penny, an actress
and director in her own right.
And in 1978,
"Mork & Mindy" brought a young
Robin Williams
into national view.
Marshall estimated he wrote
1,000 TV sitcom
scripts, before switching to the
big screen
in the 1980s. He directed Bette
Midler in
the 1988 movie "Beaches." And in
1990, "Pretty
Woman," pairing Richard Gere and
an emerging
star, Julia Roberts, became a
smash hit.
Years later, Marshall described
his approach
to directing this way:
GARRY MARSHALL: You don't know
if it's a hit
or a flop, it'll do well or not,
but we do
know the process can be
pleasant. And once
there's too much yelling and
screaming, I
go home. So I try to make it
where you don't
do that, and people somehow get
along. My
best directing tool is hugging.
The casino is our main means of
income.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marshall
occasionally appeared
on screen as well, including in
Albert Brooks'
1985 comedy, "Lost in America."
Along the way, his work earned
him dozens
of awards and nominations, and a
star on the
Hollywood Walk of Fame. Garry
Marshall died
Tuesday in Burbank, California,
after suffering
a stroke. He was 81 years old.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Defense chiefs
and other
leaders from more than 30
countries are here
in Washington for two days of
meetings on
the war against ISIS in Iraq and
Syria.
The summit comes as ISIS loses
territory in
both countries, but the group
and its followers
lash out with terrorist strikes
globally.
Meantime, there is continuing
turmoil in Turkey,
which borders both Syria and
Iraq, after Friday's
coup attempt.
For more on all of this, I spoke
a short time
ago with Michael Fallon, the
United Kingdom's
defense secretary.
Defense Secretary, welcome.
MICHAEL FALLON, U.K. Defense
Secretary: Thank
you, Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: First off,
right now, we're
hearing that the Turkish
president has declared
a state of emergency for another
three months.
This comes in a week where there
has been
a significant purge of people
who might have
been in opposition to him. Is
Turkey still
a reliable ally in NATO?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, yes, it's
still a key
ally in NATO. It's a cornerstone
of NATO.
It's very important in the
southeast corner
of NATO to have Turkey there as
a longstanding
member.
It has formidable armed forces.
And it's helping
us fight ISIL as well in the
Middle East.
So, Turkey is important.
Now, it's obviously concerning
that there's
been this coup. And we're
particularly concerned
that Turkey keeps to the path of
respecting
human rights when it's dealing
with the aftermath
of the coup.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And does
what's happening
now compromise your ability to
fight ISIS
together with Turkey?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, Turkey's
made it clear
that this doesn't affect their
commitment
to the fight against ISIL. We
want to seal
that border with Syria to stem
the flow of
foreign fighters.
And they have every interest in
not having
ISIL flourish on their doorstep.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, you're
here for a series
of conversations among defense
secretaries
and other world leaders on what
to do in this
fight. What is the United
Kingdom prepared
to do? What more are you
prepared to do?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, we're
already playing
the second part, after the
United States,
in this fight. We have carried
out the second
highest number of airstrikes.
We provide a large portion of
the surveillance
through aircraft ahead. And we
have trained
around 19,000 Iraqi and Kurdish
troops, specialist
training in how to deal with
improvised explosive
devices. So we're playing a big
part in this.
And we have announced recently
that we're
stepping up, putting more troops
in, as the
United States has asked every
member of the
coalition to do.
We are doubling the number of
troops we have
in Iraq itself, so that they can
do more training,
to really pick up on the
momentum there is
now. ISIS is being pushed back
along the Tigris
and the Euphrates. Towns and
cities are being
liberated. And we want to keep
that momentum
up.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But when you
think of fighting
wars as a defense secretary, how
do you deal
with the shift that's happened
in your enemies?
We're no longer fighting enemies
who are on
a battlefield wearing a uniform
with certain
colors on the other side of a
line. Right?
But we have shifted to an
insurgency strategy.
And then now it seems, with the
attacks that
have been happening all through
Europe, these
are lone wolves,
self-radicalized. And it
somehow falls on your doorstep
to say, let's
keep the country safe.
MICHAEL FALLON: You're right.
There is no
front line in these conflicts
anymore.
So this requires new tactics.
You need to
deal with their hybrid warfare,
the kind of
messages they're pumping out to
sustain this
very poisonous ideology. And
then you need
to deal with them where they
have captured
particular cities and they're
imposing barbaric
punishments on the citizens or
imposing very
high taxes.
So you need to deal with all
these things.
In the end, these things can
only be done
locally. They have to be won by
local forces
with security provided by the
government in
that country. Now, we can help.
We can help
with airpower, with technology,
with training,
with resources, help to
stabilize these countries
once they have been liberated.
But, in the end, the fight has
to be on the
ground by local forces that can
retain the
hearts and minds of the people
that they're
freeing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, Britain
went through
a big decision-making process
just a few weeks
ago. Before that decision, you
were a remainer.
You wanted to stay in the E.U.,
it's no secret.
You said during that time that
U.K.'s departure
would actually weaken Europe, it
would strengthen
Russia's hand.
Here we are, after the vote.
Your thoughts?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, NATO is
the -- the North
Atlantic alliance is the
principal security
that we have that Britain is
part of in Europe.
And we have added more troops to
the eastern
border of NATO. We have stepped
up to that.
Being inside the European Union
gave us another
lever. It was the union, not
NATO, for example,
that imposed sanctions on
Russia, and we will
continue in the remaining years
we're inside
the European Union to keep those
sanctions
up, to keep the pressure up on
Russia.
I would rather we would have
stayed. But the
people have decided. We have had
the vote
now. And what we have to do is
make a success
of leaving the European Union,
develop new
relations with Europe, ensure
our trade is
protected, and to continue to
play our part
in the security of Europe, which
we're doing
through a greater commitment to
NATO and more
work with our key allies, like
the United
States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Just in the
last few weeks,
we had a series of reports
coming out of Eastern
Europe on how NATO is preparing
for the possibility
of Russian aggression in places
like Poland,
places like Estonia.
What happens if Estonia raises
its hand and
says, NATO, I need help right
now? How likely
is the U.K. to want to help a
member of the
E.U. that also might may be a
NATO alliance?
MICHAEL FALLON: Well, all
members of NATO
are committed to help each
other.
And, in fact, the Baltic states,
including
Estonia, have put their hands up
and said,
we want more reassurance. We
have got Russia
conducting large-scale exercises
right on
their doorstep, flying planes
over the Baltic,
and intimidating them through
hybrid and social
media.
So, we are stepping forward, as
one of the
four countries deploying a new
forward presence,
an entire battalion in Estonia
from next year,
with French and Danish troops
added to it.
The United States is doing the
same in Poland
itself. So we're all helping
there to give
more reassurance on the on the
eastern side
of NATO and making it very clear
to Russia
that, if they attempt to
intervene in a NATO
country, in the way that they
did in Ukraine,
which is outside NATO, then
there will be
consequences.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Defense Secretary
Michael Fallon, thanks for
joining us.
MICHAEL FALLON: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, as
the International
AIDS Conference convenes in
Durban, South
Africa, this week, we continue
our End of
AIDS series.
As we have been reporting,
public health officials
believe that getting the
overwhelming majority
of HIV-positive people tested
and consistently
treated is a crucial step to
ending the epidemic,
but that's proven a difficult
goal.
But in Western Kenya, on the
border with Uganda,
there's a small island where
researchers are
finding remarkable success with
even the hardest-to-reach
groups.
Correspondent William Brangham
and producer
Jason Kane continue our series,
with support
from the Pulitzer Center on
Crisis Reporting.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It's late on a
Monday night.
Fisherman Kevin Opiyo and his
crew are heading
out onto Lake Victoria on the
very western
edge of Kenya. They throw out
their lines
and stretch out their nets,
hoping the tiny
omena fish are schooling below.
Fishing these waters is long,
grueling, dangerous
work. It's also become one of
the main pathways
for the growth of the HIV
epidemic in this
part of Kenya.
Opiyo himself is infected.
KEVIN OPIYO, Fisherman (through
translator):
I'm confident that I got it
through sexual
intercourse and can say it was
the time I
was working in Remba.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Fishing crews
often have
travel long distances to other
islands on
the lake, and into neighboring
Uganda.
DR. MOSES KAMYA, HIV Researcher:
I think there's
a mentality among fishermen that
life is not
as important. Therefore, you can
enjoy it
and have as much sex as you can.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Moses
Kamya is an HIV
researcher who's been working
with fishermen
in the region for years.
DR. MOSES KAMYA: You know,
fishermen tend
to have a lot of disposable
income, and, you
know, they can buy sex very
easily. And, of
course, where fishermen are,
there are, you
know, sex workers who hang
around them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The fishermen
live on Mfangano
Island here on Lake Victoria,
near the border
with Uganda. The island's 25,000
residents
live clustered in homes near the
water, and
fishing is the main industry.
Largely because of this
migratory fishing,
it's estimated that nearly one
out of every
three adults here is infected
with HIV. We
traveled to Mfangano Island with
Jon Cohen.
He's covered the epidemic for
"Science" magazine
in more than two dozen countries
and helped
us report this series.
JON COHEN, "Science": Here in
this region,
the HIV prevalence in fishermen
is incredibly
high. I mean, we're talking on
the order of
30, 40 percent. That's something
you see in
people who inject drugs. It's
something you
see in sex workers. But people
haven't thought
about heterosexual men as being
a key affected
population, and these fishermen,
they are.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: So, to stem
this epidemic,
how do you reach this
hard-to-reach population?
Well, you try something like
this.
This is what state-of-the-art
HIV care and
prevention in Kenya looks like.
You set up
your testing team, not in a
clinic, but right
next to the water. You do it at
night, because
that's when the fishermen are
coming home.
You get a band to play. You give
away prizes.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR, University of
California,
San Francisco: What we have
done, in order
to have a place where people
want to go test,
is made it accessible to them.
We have brought
testing to people, as opposed to
having people
have to go for the test.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Dr. Diane
Havlir is one
of the world's foremost experts
on treating
HIV. As we reported earlier,
she's helping
lead San Francisco's ambitious
strategy to
end the epidemic there, and
she's helping
run one of the largest HIV
test-and-treat
studies in the world here and in
Uganda.
The study, sponsored by the
U.S., Kenya and
Uganda, is called SEARCH.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR: HIV medicines
have been
transformative for the
individual. So what
we're testing in SEARCH is, can
we transform
communities with treatment?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Not just
individuals.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR: Not just
individuals, the
whole community. And in order to
do that,
one of the first things that we
had to do
was to figure out how to offer
testing to
every person, not just people
who were sick,
every single person in that
community.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Kenya, like
most governments
in the developing world, only
starts people
with HIV on treatment after
their immune system
becomes compromised.
But the SEARCH study is trying
to determine
whether treating HIV-positive
people immediately,
regardless of how sick they are,
can have
an impact across the entire
community. But
the problem still exists that
men here, particularly
fishermen, have generally been
very reluctant
to get tested.
DR. JAMES AYIEKO, SEARCH: We are
not able
to get to him. So, that's a
challenge.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: DR. James
Ayieko is one
of the doctors with the SEARCH
study.
DR. JAMES AYIEKO: Our system
doesn't make
health care-seeking a manly
thing. So, you
have to get something extra that
would motivate
them, you know, to come to care.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The SEARCH
team also makes
an economic argument to
fishermen: If you
don't treat your HIV, you will
get sicker,
and it's going to cost you
because you can't
work.
DR. JAMES AYIEKO: You know, if
you're infected,
you can stay out there. The
disease will progress,
you will get worse, and then you
might be
brought in, in a stretcher to
the hospital,
which is not a good option. So,
the idea,
this study is trying to bring
the idea of,
we can keep you healthy as you
are.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Fisherman
Kevin Opiyo thought
he might have gotten HIV, but
even when he
started to feel sick and weak
and found it
hard to work, he still didn't
want to get
tested.
KEVIN OPIYO (through
translator): It was fear
of my past life, fear of the
ladies that I
used to move around with. It was
that fear
that kept me away from testing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It was likely
during this
period that Opiyo brought the
virus home to
the island and infected his wife
as well.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR: One of the
things which,
sadly, still exists in HIV, it
remains a highly
stigmatized disease. And people
may suspect
they're at risk for HIV disease.
They may
deny to themselves they're at
risk for HIV
disease. So, it takes a lot of
energy, often,
for a person to go to seek
testing.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: At SEARCH's
community health
events, they know the stigma of
HIV and AIDS
will keep people away, so they
don't call
this an HIV event, and it isn't
just that.
They offer testing and care for
all sorts
of health issues: diabetes,
family planning,
hypertension, as well as HIV.
On this day, they even ran a
boat race to
attract more fishermen to the
event. Six teams
of young men competed in a race.
The prize?
Brand-new cell phones. But, of
course, you
couldn't compete until you got
tested.
Dr. Craig Cohen is part of the
SEARCH team,
and he says this broader health
approach is
more appealing for men.
DR. CRAIG COHEN, SEARCH: I'm
going there to
make sure that I'm healthy, that
my family's
healthy, my children are
healthy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It provides
cover, in a
sense.
DR. CRAIG COHEN: It's not just
cover. I mean,
these other conditions --
malaria is super
endemic here, depending on the
season. It
also helps to build up a sense
of camaraderie
around health, so that people
are understanding
that the clinic here is here for
everyone,
whether you're 70 years old, or
50 years old
living with diabetes, whether
you're 40 years
old and living with HIV.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Making the
tent bigger.
DR. CRAIG COHEN: Making the tent
much bigger,
and understanding that health is
about everyone.
HIV is part -- is under that
tent. It's not
an HIV tent. It's a health tent.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But even after
people are
diagnosed with HIV and get
started right away
on daily treatment, the next
challenge becomes
keeping them in treatment.
And for those who fall out of
care, the SEARCH
team will come find you. Today,
the team is
out looking for another
HIV-positive fisherman
who'd missed his last
appointment.
If someone stops taking their
HIV meds, the
virus will surge back, making
the person sicker.
But a resurgent virus means
you're also much
more likely to pass the virus to
others. A
person who's on regular
treatment almost never
does that.
But they found the missing
fisherman, persuaded
him to come back to the clinic
on the spot,
and made sure he stayed on his
meds, one more
success in a long campaign.
Two years ago, the U.N. set an
ambitious HIV/AIDS
goal called 90-90-90. It said
that, by the
year 2020, 90 percent of people
who have HIV
should know their status, that
90 percent
of those people should be taking
antiretroviral
treatment, and that 90 percent
of them should
be treated consistently enough
that the virus
is suppressed, undetectable in
their blood,
all that by 2020.
But here on this Kenyan island,
thanks in
large part to the SEARCH study,
they have
already hit that goal four years
early. There
are few other places in the
world with similar
success. Of course, replicating
what's happening
here across an entire nation, or
the rest
of the world, will require
enormous funding
and effort, but the SEARCH team
hopes that
by proving what works, they can
set an example.
DR. JAMES AYIEKO: I think a
study like the
SEARCH trial is giving out
evidence to show
that what was hypothesized is
really -- is
really going to be the direction
that HIV
treatment and care should go.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Having hit
this 90-90-90
goal, the SEARCH team is
monitoring their
broader aim of creating
community-wide change.
The study has found that, by
treating people
with HIV immediately, those
individuals have
been working an entire week more
per month,
compared to those who waited to
start treatment.
A large percentage of the
community is, of
course, still living with HIV
from before
this study began, but far fewer
people are
dying from it, and the virus is
much less
likely to spread.
DR. DIANE HAVLIR: When people
are taking a
treatment that is changing a
uniformly fatal
disease to a chronic disease,
they think about
investments differently. They
think about
investing, for example, in their
farming,
maybe in their fishing. And they
think about
investing more and having their
children go
to school.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Jon Cohen
says this
still may come up short on the
broader goal
of ending AIDS.
JON COHEN: The whole idea of
test and treat,
it may or may not be enough to
break the back
of an epidemic. We really don't
know. You
know, it could be that you get
to 90-90-90,
and transmissions are still
occurring at too
high of a rate to really stop
the epidemic
from being an epidemic.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The SEARCH
study here will
be wrapping up by 2020. It's
hoped that, if
it's successful enough, these
practices will
be embedded into HIV care more
permanently
throughout Kenya and Uganda and
perhaps the
rest of the world.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham
on Mfangano Island, Kenya.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You can
explore our entire
series The End of AIDS, and meet
the people
behind the stories, on our Web
site.
Also online right now, our
coverage of all
things convention-related
continues. Stream
gavel-to-gavel coverage and
follow along on
our live blog. Check out our
columnists today,
who discuss whether liberals can
find any
common ground with the GOP, and
compare Cleveland's
declining middle class with the
rest of the
U.S.
Find all that and more on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
That's all from Washington for
now. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And from here in
Cleveland,
that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
But stay with us. We will be
right back here
at 8:00 p.m. Eastern for live
special coverage
of the Republican National
Convention.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and we will see you
back here soon.